Welcome to the next
week of our course
on parallel functional
programming with Java.
Now that we've examined
and explained the features
and inner workings of
Java parallel streams,
it's time to step
back and discuss
the conditions under which
parallel streams should
and should not be applied.
Although converting a sequential
stream to a parallel stream
requires only
minuscule code changes,
it's not always the
right thing to do,
since parallel streams
only provide a performance
boost under certain conditions.
In particular, parallel
streams work best
when tasks are independent,
computationally expensive,
and are applied to large data
sources on multicore platforms.
In contrast, parallel
stream performance
can suffer when the data
source is expensive to split
and/or splits unevenly,
the startup costs
of parallel processing
overwhelm the amount
of data actually
processed in parallel,
the cost of combining
partial results is high,
and there is only a
single processor core.
When such conditions
apply, it's often better
just to stick with
sequential streams.
The bulk of this
week's lessons focus
on the Java parallel
ImageStreamGang example,
which is yet another case
study that showcases parallel
streams.
This app combines Java's
object-oriented and functional
programming features together
with parallel streams
to process a list of
image URLs by ignoring
any cached images that have
already been downloaded
and processed, downloading
the non-cached images
from remote websites,
applying a list of filters
to transform each image,
storing the filtered images
in the local file
system, and finally,
displaying the
images to the user.
The declarative stream
pipeline used in this example
helps to close the gap between
the ImageStreamGang's domain
intent and the parallel
computations performed
to implement that intent.
The final lessons
this week evaluate
the pros and cons of the Java
parallel streams framework.
There are many benefits
of parallel streams.
In particular, this framework
simplifies parallel programming
by shielding developers from
the details of splitting,
applying, and combining
results, as well as alleviating
the need for explicit
multi-threading
and synchronization
and application code.
Moreover, parallel
stream implementations
are often much faster
and more scalable
than sequential implementations.
Naturally, there are
also some drawbacks.
For example, not all
parallel programming problems
can be expressed via the
split, apply, combine model.
Likewise, spliterators
and collectors
do incur some overhead.
In, general, however
the pros of Java
parallel streams outweigh the
cons for many common use cases.